---
layout: post
title: "A quick guide to Contrastive Learning"
date: 2024-06-01
categories: tutorials
permalink: /posts/contrastive-learning/
usemathjax: true
---

Contrastive learning, much like the secret sauce behind our brain's ability to discern patterns, is revolutionizing the field of machine learning. But what exactly is contrastive learning, and why is it causing such a stir? In this post, I'll guide you through the fundamentals of contrastive learning. Let's get started! 🎉


## Table of Contents
1. [Understanding Contrastive Learning](#understanding-contrastive-learning)
2. [Awesome Contrastive Learning Papers](#awesome-contrastive-learning-papers)
<!-- 3. [Some further thoughts](#some-further-thoughts) -->


# Understanding Contrastive Learning <a name="understanding-contrastive-learning"></a>

<!-- Contrastive learning is a fascinating approach in machine learning that hinges on the principle of learning representations by contrasting pairs of data points. At its core, contrastive learning aims to teach machines to understand the world by discerning similarities and differences between data points.  -->

## The Concept of Contrastive Learning

Imagine you're a detective trying to solve a puzzle. You're given two sets of clues: one set that helps you identify the culprit based on evidence like fingerprints and eyewitness accounts, and another set that throws you off track with misleading information such as planted alibis and false leads. Contrastive learning operates on a similar principle, but instead of suspects and clues, it deals with data points and similarities.

In essence, contrastive learning involves presenting a model with pairs of data points and teaching it to differentiate between similar pairs (positive samples) and dissimilar pairs (negative samples). By optimizing the model to maximize the similarity between positive pairs and minimize the similarity between negative pairs, the model learns to capture meaningful representations of the data.

## Key Components of Contrastive Learning

### Poitive generation

In contrastive learning, generating positive pairs is crucial for training the model effectively. Positive pairs consist of data points that are similar or belong to the same class. Creating positive pairs involves various strategies depending on the dataset and the task at hand.

One common method is to use data augmentation techniques to create variations of the same data point. For example, in computer vision tasks, positive pairs can be generated by applying random transformations such as rotation, cropping, flipping, or color jittering to an image. These augmented versions of the original image serve as positive examples, which may still be considered to represent the same object. Another approach is to leverage domain-specific knowledge to identify similarities between data points. For instance, in natural language processing tasks, positive pairs can be created by considering synonyms or paraphrases of the same sentence or phrase. Deep learning models, such as NERF, can also be used for augmentations (create different views of the object); however, this would greatly add to heavy computational costs.


### Negative Sampling
Another crucial aspect of contrastive learning is negative sampling, which involves selecting dissimilar pairs of data points to serve as negative examples during training. Negative sampling plays a pivotal role in guiding the model to focus on relevant features and discard irrelevant ones.

The most basic approach to negative sampling is to randomly select data points from the dataset that are are simply not the anchor point. This is particularly effective in datasets with diverse classes, reducing the likelihood of sampling instances from the same class as the anchor. Another method for negative sampling is to employ hard negative mining or generation, where challenging examples that are close to positive samples are identified or generated based on given rules and used as negative examples. By focusing on challenging examples, the model is forced to learn more robust representations and improve its performance on difficult tasks.


<!-- ### Similarity Metrics
Central to contrastive learning is the concept of similarity metrics, which quantify the resemblance between two data points. Common similarity metrics include cosine similarity, Euclidean distance, and dot product similarity. -->

### Contrastive Loss

The contrastive loss writes as below:

$$
\mathcal{L}_{N} = \mathbb{E}_{\mathbf{X}} \left[ -\log \frac{e^{f_{\text{sim}}(\mathbf{x}_{i}, \mathbf{x}_{j})/\tau}}{\sum_{k=1}^{N} \mathbb{I}_{[k \neq i,j]} e^{f_{\text{sim}}(\mathbf{x}_{i}, \mathbf{x}_{k})/\tau}} \right]
$$

Where:

- $$ \mathcal{L}_{N} $$ is the overall contrastive loss.
- $$ N $$ is the number of samples.
- $$ \mathbb{E}_{\mathbf{X}} $$ is the expectation operator over the batch of data $$ \mathbf{X} $$.
- $$ \mathbf{x}_{i} $$ is an anchor sample.
- $$ \mathbf{x}_{j} $$ is a positive sample (similar to the anchor).
- $$ \mathbf{x}_{k} $$ is a negative sample (dissimilar to the anchor).
- $$ \tau $$ is the temperature parameter to scale the logits.
- $$ f_{\text{sim}}(\cdot, \cdot) $$ is a similarity metric (e.g., Euclidean distance or cosine similarity).




# Awesome Contrastive Learning Papers <a name="awesome-contrastive-learning-papers"></a>

Here's a curated list of papers on contrastive learning:


**[SimCLR: A Simple Framework for Contrastive Learning of Visual Representations](https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.05709)**  
   Authors: Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, Geoffrey Hinton \\
   Venue: ECCV 2020  

**[MoCo: Momentum Contrast for Unsupervised Visual Representation Learning](https://arxiv.org/abs/1911.05722)**  
   Authors: Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, Ross Girshick \\
   Venue: CVPR 2020  

**[SwAV: Unsupervised Learning of Visual Features by Contrasting Cluster Assignments](https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.09882)**  
   Authors: Mathilde Caron, Ishan Misra, Julien Mairal, Priya Goyal, Piotr Bojanowski, Armand Joulin \\
   Venue: NeurIPS 2020  

**[MoCo v2: Improved Baselines with Momentum Contrastive Learning](https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.04297)**  
   Authors: Xinlei Chen, Haoqi Fan, Ross Girshick, Kaiming He \\
   Venue: arXiv preprint  

**[BYOL: Bootstrap Your Own Latent - A New Approach to Self-Supervised Learning](https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.07733)**  
   Authors: Jean-Bastien Grill, Florian Strub, Florent Altché, Corentin Tallec, Pierre H. Richemond, Elena Buchatskaya, Carl Doersch, Bernardo Avila Pires, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Bilal Piot, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Rémi Munos, Michal Valko \\
   Venue: NeurIPS 2020  

**[Barlow Twins: Self-Supervised Learning via Redundancy Reduction](https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.03230)**  
   Authors: Jure Zbontar, Li Jing, Ishan Misra, Yann LeCun, Stéphane Deny \\
   Venue: arXiv preprint  

**[CLIP: Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training](https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.00020)**  
   Authors: Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, Ilya Sutskever \\
   Venue: NeurIPS 2021  

**[SimCSE: Simple Contrastive Learning of Sentence Embeddings](https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.08821)**  
   Authors: Tianyu Gao, Xingcheng Yao, Danqi Chen \\
   Venue: arXiv preprint  

<!-- # Some further thoughts <a name="some-further-thoughts"></a> -->